II. 
BREAST IMAGING LEXICON - 
MAMMOGRAPHY
MAMMOGRAPHY
Table 1. BI-RADS® Mammography Lexicon Overview
Breast Tissue 
Terms
Breast density’
(A) The breasts are almost entirely fatty
(B) There are scattered areas of f ibroglandular density
(C) The breasts are heterogeneously dense, which may obscure small masses
(D) The breasts are extremely dense, which lowers the sensitivity of mammography
Findings 
Terms
A. Masses
1. Shape
a. Oval
b. Lobulated
c. Round
d. Irregular
2. Margin
a. Circumscribed
b. Obscured
c. Indistinct
d. Spiculated
3. Density
a. Fat-containing
b. Low density
c. Equal density
d. High density
B. Calcifications
1. Typically benign
a. Skin
b. Vascular
c. Coarse
d. Large rod-like
e. Round
f. Rim
g. Layering
h. Suture
2. Suspicious morphology
a. Amorphous
b. Coarse heterogeneous
c. Fine pleomorphic
d. Fine linear or fine linear-branching
3. Distribution
a. Diffuse
b. Regional
c. Grouped
d. Linear
e. Segmental
C. Architectural distortion
D. Asymmetries
1. Global asymmetry
2. Asymmetry
3. Focal asymmetry
9
v2025 MANUAL

MAMMOGRAPHY
1 In July 2025, the FDA approved an alternative standard that would allow the interpreting physician to provide an overall 
assessment of breast density that is phrased in the singular phrasing. The singular phrasing is intended to be used in 
reports of unilateral mammograms. Please see the Guidance section for more information.
E Lymph nodes
1. Intramammary
a. Normal
b. Abnormal
2. Axillary
a. Normal
b. Abnormal
F. Skin lesions
G. Dilated ducts
1. Multiple
2. Solitary
H. Associated features
1. Skin retraction
2. Nipple retraction
3. Skin thickening
4. Trabecular thickening
I. Special cases
1. Gynecomastia
2. Implants and other forms of augmentation
3. Mastectomy
J. Location of finding
1. Laterality
2. Location in breast
3. Depth and/or distance from the nipple
ACR BI-RADS®
10

III. 
BREAST DENSITY
Breast density is defined as the relative proportion of breast parenchyma to fat within the breast. 
Mammographically, breast parenchyma is radiodense relative to radiolucent fat. There are four 
categories of breast density (Table 2): the breasts are almost entirely fatty, there are scattered areas 
of f ibroglandular density, the breasts are heterogeneously dense which may obscure small masses, 
and the breasts are extremely dense which limits the sensitivity of mammography. Reporting breast 
density is required by Food and Drug Administration (FDA) legislation as of September 2024. Language 
included in the report both to the referring physician and the patient must follow the federal guidance.
People with heterogeneously dense or extremely dense breasts are considered to have dense 
breasts, while those with almost entirely fatty breasts or scattered areas of fibroglandular density 
are considered to be non-dense. Most commonly, the interpreting radiologist subjectively catego­
rizes the breast density using visual inspection of the breast parenchyma on the craniocaudal and 
mediolateral DM or SM views, although FDA-approved automated density measurement software is 
available. With the BI-RADS 5th Edition, the classification of breast density changed from an evalua­
tion of the percentage of dense tissue to an assessment based on the likelihood that overlying tissue 
may obscure a cancer. This classification continues in v2025. If tissue in one region is dense and 
potentially masking an underlying cancer, then the breast density classification should be based on 
an assessment of this region, rather than the overall amount of parenchymal tissue. If each breast 
falls into a different density category, the greater density of the two is assigned to that examination. 
Breast density can be variable from year to year, depending on multiple factors such as weight gain 
or loss, estrogen replacement therapy, menopause, etc. Therefore, breast density is updated at each 
examination to accurately reflect the current breast density.
Breast density is significant for two reasons: mammographic accuracy and breast cancer risk. The 
impact of breast density on mammographic accuracy is due to the masking effect of dense fibro- 
glandular tissue. With film-screen mammography, sensitivity declines significantly from fatty breasts 
to extremely dense breasts [9]. The masking effect caused by dense breast tissue has been reduced by 
advances in technology, first with the adoption of digital mammography, and, more recently, with DBT. 
In the DMIST trial, the sensitivity of mammography in women with dense breasts increased from 55% 
with film mammography to 70% with digital mammography [10]. With DBT the interpreting radiologist can 
scroll through images of the breast slice by slice, further reducing the masking effect of dense breast 
tissue. In women with dense breasts, the cancer detection rate increased from 4.5 per 1000 women 
screened with digital mammography to 5.8 per 1000 women screened with DBT (p<0.001) [11].
As with increasing age, pathogenic genetic variants, family history, and reproductive factors, having 
dense breasts confers an increased inherent risk for developing breast cancer. Compared to the 
breasts of women with scattered fibroglandular tissue, the odds ratio of breast cancer is 0.6 for 
almost entirely fatty. 1.4 for heterogeneously dense, and 1.6 for extremely dense breasts [12].
Table 2. Breast Density Categories1
11n July 2025. the FDA approved an alternative standard that would allow the interpreting physician to provide an overall 
assessment of breast density that is phrased in the singular phrasing. The singular phrasing is intended to be used in 
reports of unilateral mammograms. Please see the Guidance section for more information.
(A) The breasts are almost entirely fatty
(B) There are scattered areas of fibroglandular density
(C) The breasts are heterogeneously dense, which may obscure small masses
(D) The breasts are extremely dense, which lowers the sensitivity of mammography
MAMMOGRAPHY
11
v2025 MANUAL

MAMMOGRAPHY
Figure 1 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition 
category A, almost entirely fatty (SM).
Figure 2 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition category A, almost entirely 
fatty (SM).
ACR BI-RADSE
12

Figure 3 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition category A, almost 
entirely fatty (SM).
MAMMOGRAPHY
Figure 4 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast 
composition category A, almost entirely 
fatty (DM).
Figure 5 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition 
category B, scattered areas of f ibroglandular 
density (SM).
13
v2025 MANUAL

MAMMOGRAPHY
Figure 6 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition 
category B, scattered areas of fibroglandular density (SM).
Figure?- Breast Density: BI-RADS breast 
composition category B, scattered areas of 
fibroglandular density (DM).
Figure 8 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast 
composition category B, scattered areas of 
fibroglandular density (DM).
ACR BI-RADS6
14

Figure 9 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition 
category C, heterogeneously dense, which may obscure 
small masses (DM).
MAMMOGRAPHY
Figure 10 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition 
category C. heterogeneously dense, which may obscure 
small masses (SM). Note that although the overall volume 
of dense tissue is not large, a cancer could be obscured in 
areas containing dense breast tissue.
15
v2025 MANUAL

MAMMOGRAPHY
Figure 11 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition category C, 
heterogeneously dense, which may obscure small masses (DM).
Figure 12 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast 
composition category C. heterogeneously dense, 
which may obscure small masses (DM).
ACR BI-RADS e
16

Figure 13 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast composition category D, 
extremely dense, which lowers the sensitivity of mammography (SM).
MAMMOGRAPHY
17
v2025 MANUAL

MAMMOGRAPHY
Figure 14 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast 
composition category D, extremely dense, which 
lowers the sensitivity of mammography (SM).
Figure 15 - Breast Density: BI-RADS breast 
composition category D, extremely dense, which 
lowers the sensitivity of mammography (SM).
Figure 16 - Breast Density: Bl- RADS breast composition 
category D, extremely dense, which lowers the sensitivity 
of mammography (SM).
ACR BI-RADS®
18